so we're we're all at risk for
developing autoimmune disease and the
rates of autoimmune disease now exceed
cancer and cardiovascular disease
combined but but stress when it's
uncontrolled and it's past a person's
abilities can be devastating for the
brain and why
the cortisol causes the atrophy of the
brain so it actually shrinks the brain
dr datis karazzian welcome to the show
thank you pleasure to be here dude i'm
so excited to have you on obsessed
with the brain and what we can do to
make sure that it stays in high
functioning for a long time so let's
talk about leaky brain okay what what is
the most
horrendous thing that people do that
causes leaky brain and what is leaky
brain
so we have blood brain barrier just like
we have a gut barrier and the
blood-brain barrier can become permeable
and then particles can go through
pathogens can go through
some of the people that probably
developed viral infections like long
covet probably had some viral particles
go through for blood brain barrier
permeability that is really interesting
okay so
uh
tight junctions can break down well so
the epithelial lining of the gut is a
single cell thick and so that breaking
down because you're eating bad foods or
whatever that i get is it equally sort
of
de minimis in the brain like is it a
really thin layer that stops particles
from getting in there the blood brain
barrier is basically just some
endothelial blood vessels and some
astral glial cells
and we've actually published research
showing
uh there's a high correlation between
gut permeability and blood vein
permeability meaning it's the same thing
that causes when you get one you get the
other okay and zonulin will open up the
junctions of the gut but also
i'm sorry
zoning is a protein that it's released
when people for example have gluten
sensitivity or is that a protective
mechanism from the body or is that
actually in the wheat no it's protection
in the bodies when you get an infection
your body releases zonulin to get rid of
the pathogens opens up the tight
junction so you get rid of it and they
actually scripted that with cholera and
cholera infections and they found
something called zonulin including
toxins ot
and then they found that that opened up
that got bigger but basically the
mechanisms like one of the most common
mechanisms for people that are gluten
sensitive as an example they have
resonant release and that opens up their
tight functions of their gut they get
leaky gut but also zonoline opens up the
dijunction of the brain and the same
inflammatory aux state of stress
mechanisms that break down the gut
barrier can also break down the
blood-brain barrier so
if your antioxidant levels are low and
you're around a lot of environmental
pollutants if you have an inflammatory
condition
those all make you susceptible to having
these barriers break down and barriers
break down pretty quickly and they
regrow they regenerate quickly too but
they can definitely break down and when
the blood brain barrier is permeable
then what happens is these immune cells
in the brain call glial cells they get
they get exposed to environmental
pathogens and different proteins and
they can create an inflammatory cascade
and when people get inflammatory cascade
in the brain the most common symptom
they'll get is something like brain fog
because inflammation slows down nerve
conductance so all of a sudden they have
brain fog and some people will notice
that they eat certain foods they get
brain fog they get around certain
environments they get brain fog and
some people had a traumatic brain injury
and had brain fog for for for that
period of time simply an infection have
ongoing brain fog for free time
but even traumatic brain injuries uh
break down the blood-brain barrier as a
way to get t cells and b cells in there
to clean up some of the debris so you
know breaking down or opening up our gut
bearing and blood brain barrier is a
normal physiological functions sometimes
we have infections that do that
sometimes we get traumatic brain injury
that does that but also it's a very thin
membrane so when you have lots of free
radicals and lots of ox like free
oxidative stress inflammation they break
down
so the goal would be from an
evolutionary standpoint you want to be
able to open and close it yeah but
modern lifestyle is causing it to be
open all the time and so while it's
opened from an evolutionary standpoint
to get things out we're now just letting
a ton of things in
okay so in the book why doesn't my brain
work you list a lot of things but if i
were to point to
there's one thing that really stood out
to me above everything else but there's
two things that come up in the book a
lot so environmental toxins i'm going to
set that to the side for a second
and talk about gluten which
intentional or not to me reading the
book really came across as a villain
in the book
um does that feel right like if you were
going to tell people hey if you're only
going to make a single change
would it be to cut out gluten or are
there so many problems in food that we
really have to address food more
holistically i mean it's only a problem
for people that are sensitive to gluten
not everyone's sensitive to gluten so
some people can eat the out of
gluten it's going to be fine yeah
interesting and then some people have
full-blown celiac disease which means
they have a
t-cell exaggerated response to gluten so
they have severe inflammatory reaction
to they have a hla dq genome type of
gene type that makes them extremely
sensitive to the protein what is our
body mistaking it as a foreign invader
no it's it's just just uh basically i
guess you could think of it that way as
a foreign variable is an antibody system
produced against gluten the problem with
gluten in the brain is the antibodies
produced against gluten
have cross reactivity so they can
actually bind to the brain so
um you know normally when you get an
infection like a pathogen comes in you
produce an antibody the antibody can
then attach to the pathogen
and then once the antibody attached to
the pathogen then the soldiers of the
immune system like t cells and natural
killer cells they come in and destroy
the pathogen right so if someone
sensitive to gluten they're making
antibodies as if it was a pathogen and
then those gluten antibodies bind to
wheat so they can destroy the protein to
break down quickly right but those
gluten antibodies can also bind to
different tissues of the brain
specifically every man called the
cerebellum and this is a condition
called gluten ataxia in the medical
literature is a disease but gluten
actually does cross react with the brain
so wait is it the antibody that's
attacking the cerebellum or is it the
gluten that's attached so so when you
look at antibodies antibodies bind to
proteins but they actually bind to
amino acid sequences so each protein has
an amino acid sequence right
and if there are eight or more amino
acids sequence an identical identical
chain together then the antibody
produced one protein can bind to another
protein
the reason gluten can be so devastating
for some people
is because they have especially if the
blood brain barrier is permeable the
gluten antibodies can then cross into
the brain and then bind to tissues of
the brain and then the immune system
will then assume those are foreign
foreign invaders and start to destroy
them so like the gluten is directly
binding to the cerebellum
as it was going to directly bind to
gluten because the amino acid similarity
is so alike between cerebellar amino
acid sequences and gluten cerebral and
gluten amino acid sequences so once that
antibody attaches
then t cells go in there and destroy
whatever's being attached to it so wait
a second so
basically the
because the god i hope i'm getting this
right because the audience is like come
on you dumb ass uh
the
gluten molecule
creates an antibody yeah
but the gluten happens to look just like
a cerebellum
protein perfect thank you and so once
you make an antibody for the gluten you
have accidentally made an antibody that
can't tell the difference between the
wheat gluten protein and the in this
case cerebellum yeah exactly oh that's
called molecular mimicry
and it's scary
whoa so this is interesting so here's
here's why i drag people into the weeds
and i honestly have no idea if my
audience loves us hates this but
when i can
picture it
it's way easier for me to conform to
behaviors that i don't want to give up
so for instance i want to eat bread
right but when i understand what's
actually going on yeah then it gets a
lot less appealing but when it's this
vague notion of like
oh gluten's only a problem for some
people like then
there's some truth to that i mean if you
don't have gluten antibodies then you
don't have the chance of prostate
activity right and if you have gluten
antibodies but your blood brain per is
is not impermeable it's intact then you
don't have to worry about that mechanism
in your brain though right wouldn't i
still like well i guess if my gut never
becomes permeable i don't have to worry
about it right so if your gut and blood
brain very permeable and then you have
gluten sensitivity
and you eat gluten and you make
antibodies and that blood grain bear is
permeable are there some people though
that have a permeable gut
gluten is crossing it and no antibodies
formed or does the antibody form 100 of
the time if you have leaky gut and
gluten crosses
it's not 100 of the time but over time
if you have intestinal permeability and
proteins that are undigested cross
then the immune system starts to react
against them and this is why a lot of
people develop sensitivity over time
so there's a phenomenal immunology
called immune tolerance oral tolerance
which is why we develop food
sensitivities so there's a there's many
mechanisms like abnormal dendritic cells
overactive cooper cells
intestinal permeability
and this is because so the gut becomes
permeable yep
random ass proteins are crossing over
yeah the body's like this is really
annoying yeah but i'm not gonna get up
in arms yet yeah but you keep doing it
and then the body finally is like all
right i've had enough of this i'm
making antibodies and we're going ham
yeah is that more or less how this yep
and actually in the neurological
scientific literature they consider
gluten sensitivity neurological disease
it just happened to be
gastroenterologists found at first and
two-thirds of people have gluten
sensitivity never have gastrointestinal
symptoms they just have cognitive
decline and in the brain there are no
pain fibers uh okay well let me ask
is there a way for gluten to get to the
brain without first breaking down the
junctions in the gut
well as long as a person makes
antibodies then this whole
cross-reactive mechanism is possible if
the protein is non-dangerous but if the
protein is undigested
then that's when this immune response
really triggers if the protein is broken
down so when you have a protein protein
is a bunch of amino acids stuck together
right
and then as your body digests those
enzymes they become individual amino
acids individual amino acids are so
small that antibodies can't bind to them
so there's no immune reaction so the
situation where someone digests gluten
doesn't have a gluten sensitivity breaks
down gluten to small particle amino
acids they cross through there's no
problem if someone has an intestinal
barrier that's open and then gluten is
undigested and that crosses
now there's all these immune reactions
that take place then they start to
develop gluten antibodies giggling
sensitivity and if their blood brain
barrier is breached now these good
antibodies
can get into the brain and then start to
cross react with brain tissue and then
they get subtle brain inflammation and
inflammation the brain doesn't cause
pain because there's no pain fibers in
the brain there's no nose receptors in
the brain so as their inflammation the
brain continues that shuts down nerve
conductance
and then now they just feel like they
can't get to the thought they can't
focus they can't concentrate
and these responses can happen two or
three days later so they get exposed to
gluten it may not even be that same day
like the next day their brain's not
working
and then over a period of time they get
degeneration in these pathways and then
they just see the function go downhill
all right my friend i have a big
announcement my incredible and talented
wife lisa is about to launch her new
book radical confidence in it she has
managed to perfectly capture the process
of how to go from feeling lost and
insecure to taking control of your life
and doing amazing things despite feeling
fear sometimes a lot of fear now let me
tell you nobody knows lisa better than
me but when i read radical confidence
for the first time and heard her
describe what it was like for her to go
from having these big exciting dreams as
a kid to then as an adult scheduling her
life around the tv shows that she wanted
to watch or how lonely and isolated she
felt instead of pursuing her dreams it
was brutal for me i would never say
though that it was worth it for her to
go through all of that just so that she
could write something down that allows
others to avoid it but i will say that
at least she was able to capture the
strategies that she used to break out of
that rut find her voice and begin doing
incredible things despite her
insecurities and fears that she wasn't
going to be good enough to achieve great
things so while it hurts me to know the
dark place that lisa went through i
really am excited for people who are
going through something similar right
now to read this book radical confidence
is an instruction manual for how to
become the hero of your own life even
when you're scared to death look i know
better than just about anybody how easy
it is to get off track in life or to
just not have yet found your calling and
it's even easier for people to feel so
insecure and unprepared that they don't
even want to pursue the things that they
want but what lisa shows people in
radical confidence is that the radical
part is that you can accomplish
extraordinary things even when you feel
fear that's what radical confidence is
being afraid and unsure and having a
tool kit that allows you to still make
massive progress pre-order your copy
today because if you act now you can
claim the bonuses that lisa has created
for you at
radicalconfidence.com they're only
available if you pre-order so act now
then once you've done that we'll get
back to today's episode all right guys
read the book and get ready to be the
hero of your own life peace out
this is so interesting okay so the vast
majority of our immune system is in our
gut yeah but is it behind the epithelial
lining or is it going in and out
actually into the the gut where the food
particles are being digested
i mean there's immune function on the
barrier of the gut with cells called
dendritic cells but the majority of
immune response is once it gets through
the gut right that's where we have these
really reactive t cells that play a role
okay and if somebody had
leaky gut and i tested their blood would
i find gluten protein in the bloodstream
i would have to right yeah and you can
actually measure leaky gut by looking at
something called zonulin that's the
marker uh it's also a zoning including
marker protein and you can actually make
it is zonulin only produced when it's
gluten
uh once once the tight junctions break
down those little particles break down
also and then you can make antibodies
against them so you can have zonulin
levels
uh show up even if it's unrelated to
gluten
and then for the blood brain barrier
there's a protein specifically called
s100b
and you can do a blood test and measure
if someone has blood brain barrier
permeability so like the worst scenario
would be someone has gluten antibodies
zonulin including leaky gut antibodies
and then s100b blood brain barrier
antibodies now they have chronic
condition and symptoms no one can figure
out
and they maybe go off gluten maybe 100
and they think they don't have a gluten
reaction then they finally go off 100
gluten free and then within like two or
three weeks their brain function
improves and they can see that
connection
so you can actually in a clinical
setting see it all in a laboratory test
just knowing no one tests it well
zonulin though you said can be a
response to other things yeah so once a
tight junction so zonulin occluding our
both proteins that control the the tight
junctions once the tight junction starts
to get inflamed and have things
destroyed and break it down those tight
junction proteins break into the into
the bloodstream and then
immune system cells in the gut immune
cells in the gut react against them and
there's some antibody production so we
can measure
those with a blood test got you so
zonulin just says i have leaky gut i
don't necessarily know that it's gluten
but i can check for other things that
are only gluten yep
and i can tell you we just i'm just
finishing up a manuscript in a
publication with 200 patients where we
looked at zombie and antibodies and
their predictive risks for getting
autoimmune disease and it's sometimes
200 percent increased risk
it's depending on which i checked
24 different autoimmune diseases but
there's a significant risk for half of
them i've had a larger sample size i'm
sure i could have found more i only had
200 but
it's high risk once you've got barry
starts to break down you can develop
autoimmunity the problem is gluten is a
very inflammatory protein and the gluten
we're eating now is like a new protein
it's not the same protein and there's
about 10 new proteins in gluten so when
people start to get intestinal barrier
breakdown just from modern lifestyle
modern diet and balanced microbiomes
people start to make antibodies against
gluten but the problem with gluten is it
cross reacts with the brain it also
cross reacts with other tissues not just
cerebellum tissue of the brain but
there's some studies that show that
cross reacts with proteins in joint
joint tissue so it can lead to
inflammatory autoimmune diseases
and then milk is very similar to the
gluten structure so when people develop
gluten sensitivity they get they get
milk and tolerances what yeah so this is
why like with autistic uh communities
they have to go gluten dairy free to get
some change because they can't just do a
gluten gluten alone wow okay so
obviously i've heard people say to avoid
dairy but i've never really understood
why if i'm completely honest
so it's the same biomimicry that's going
on
and it matches gluten specifically yes
and are there more yes they're more okay
so we have gluten we have um dairy yes
that have this biomimicry it gets in the
brain
the immune system is going to go ham yep
because it's actually binding to the
protein
casein has a cross-reactive pattern with
myelin basic proteins it's a little bit
different than
the cerebellum but they're very similar
most neurological tissue proteins are
very similar
so so for people that don't know the
myelin sheath is like a fatty covering
that allows the
neurons to fire more efficiently
basically exactly
so is this attacking the myelin sheath
yeah so just like you make antibodies if
you make antibodies specifically against
the
casein protein of milk milk has multiple
proteins yep but if it makes antibiotics
against casein casein cross reacts that
has molecular mimicry with myelin
and we actually published the paper we
and years ago we took 400 healthy blood
donors and we checked how many of them
had gluten antibodies how many had mild
antibodies and we looked for
correlations between neurological
autoimmune markers so the ones that had
milk antibodies had a very high degree
of correlation with having myelin basic
protein autoimmunity and cerebrum
there's a lot of people walking around
that actually have neurological
antibodies to the brain that don't have
that mass yet
but they can't yet or they may never
develop but because if you destroy the
myelin sheath that is ms right yeah but
the problem is with ms you have to have
the diagnosis criteria of having
multiple lesions on mri that that show
you have that that you have ms right so
you have to you have to in order to get
an mri signal for what they call
hyperintensity signal white matter
signal you have to you have to lose 60
of your myelin sheath
or more so if you have someone who's
lost 40 50 of the myelin sheath
and they have neurological antibodies
their mri still looks normal
but they may have physical examination
findings they may have
weird neurological symptoms no one
understands
and testing for neurological antibodies
aren't porn of a routine
you know health insurance model it's
done in research settings but it has
been accepted as a routine part of that
model but clinically if you have
neurological antibodies you have
the immune system attacking the brain
there's a lot of people that have
chronic
undiagnosed neurological symptoms that
have these antibodies against the brain
some of them are triggered by gluten
some are triggered by dairy those are
the two most common ones
pathogens we published a paper and
showed that different proteins of
sarcophage ii
can cross-react with the brain they have
molecular mimicry with the brain
some people have long covid or probably
getting neurological autoimmunity
developed
they get a pathogen they get the
infection they make antibodies against
there's spike proteins nuclear proteins
membrane proteins envelop proteins and
source cover two there's actually 24
different proteins we mapped those all
out and then publication published in
frontiers immunology and we found
there's direct cross molecular mimicry
cross reactivity with that pathogen
and brain so i think a lot of people are
getting these diverse neurological
symptoms from long covet are actually
having the onset of neurological
autoimmune disease development
because just to go back to that core
idea
there's in those 24 different proteins
some number of them match
a normal protein that should be in our
body and so as
the immune system creates the antibodies
to slap around covid it ends up slapping
itself around yes and now we have a
problem yeah and we mapped this out we
mapped those all out in the paper how do
you stop that then
well this all comes back to
how do you not lose your immune
tolerance as a human being
so we're we're all at risk for
developing autoimmune disease and the
rates of autoimmune disease now exceed
cancer and cardiovascular disease
combined
so some yes
so some of the current statistics show
that 1 in 12 women have autoimmune
disease 1 in 25 men have autoimmune
disease why so much more for women
there's some theories between how
estrogen may
make t-cells more responsive no one
really knows there's just a bunch of
theories but there isn't a concrete
answer but it is more common in women uh
okay this is really terrifying so we
have somebody in our company that has
long covid
and
i hadn't really stopped to try to
formulate a hypothesis on how it would
shake down but this is like i can walk
you through it well i think i understand
how it starts but now what's distressing
is if you stop eating gluten to get rid
of well this may not be gluten so here's
the thing for them the pathogen was the
trigger right so then they got source
covered why isn't it going away then
because once autoimmunity turns on it
doesn't turn off that's what's freaking
me it's an uncurable disease there are
uncurable diseases
so now it's all about can you put in
remission and relapse so let me give you
a scenario say someone developed long
covet right
the next question is what kind of
symptoms do you have
they say i get vertigo and dizziness
then you know the cerebellum might cross
your activity they say that
you know now they they can't control
their blood pressure and they they're
dropping there's a marker called 21
hydroxylase that we found cross
reactivity this is an adrenal antibody
you can automate it anywhere so the
patient's clinical symptoms after they
get the infection can give you a clue
where those and where those autoimmune
reactions are and then you can measure
specific antibodies
for those specific symptoms and then if
you see the antibody high then you know
that now they have autoimmune reactivity
now in the world of immunology they use
the word
autoimmune reactivity which is different
than autoimmune disease autoimmune
reactivity means you have the antibodies
there
but you don't have full destruction of
the tissue
to be diagnosed with an autoimmune
disease like someone who has myelin
antibodies against their brain has
neurological
autoimmune reactivity but until they
have enough lesions to show up on an mri
they won't fit the criteria of ms so now
they walk into the healthcare system for
decades and even their whole life never
really diagnosed what's happening
because the healthcare system is so
focused on autoimmune disease and not
autoimmune reactivity
for sure there's a lot of patients that
develop lung covid that now have
autoimmunity it may not always be the
brain
in our paper we found multiple tissue
tissues that can cross react with it but
that's the concept of molecular mimicry
and that's what's scary because you
could be doing everything right and be
super healthy and all of a sudden your
immune system just regulates maybe get
the perfect storm maybe you get the
infection while you were under stress
and had free radical exposure and your
gene type at that time period with the
host viral gene turn that turn that
mechanism on and now you have
autoimmunity and now you have an
uncurable disease and now you become the
mystery weird patient that no one can
figure out and now as your immune system
starts to dysregulate
you start to react to foods your
cervical chemicals those didn't trigger
the vicious cycle and there's because
they at a
protein level look the same
well some of the some of that is
molecular mimicry but once you start to
develop an autoimmune disease your whole
immune system starts to become
uh rubbed up and the inflammatory
response from autoimmunity itself will
break down the intestinal tight
junctions there we go and then it starts
to break down the blood brain barrier
and then you get a person who's got
leaky gut leaky brain multiple food
sensitivities they start to react to
chemicals they lose something called
immune tolerance now there's this
vicious cycle and they're confused
immune tolerance yeah what's that so
immune tolerance is
this concept immunology where you should
tolerate your environment and there's
there's dietary protein tolerance which
is like food sensitivities there's
chemical tolerance whether you react to
chemicals or not and there's self-tissue
tolerance which is autoimmune disease so
once you lose one you lose them all
okay so once someone loses
self-tolerance develops autoimmune
disease their immune system dysregulates
so now they have dietary protein
intolerance so now they start to react
against a bunch of foods that they may
not even know that they have reactions
to it's not and you think the thing that
unites all of these is just you've
you've revved revved up the immune
system and now they're looking for any
excuse to fight yeah it's more of like
an immune system dysregulative response
they just dysregulate you can't figure
out what to do anymore the cells are
confused and then wherever you have
antibodies produced is where the immune
system is going to react against and
then the whole molecular mimicry pattern
comes in so
you make antibodies that you know we
think of antibodies like to a pathogen
just binding to the pathogen they don't
they bind to any every other protein
that's similar to it in the body
and that can happen with food protein
like gluten and celiac disease it can
happen with someone who gets long covid
it's uh
it's very scary yeah and it's very
common
and it's clearly easy to identify and
diagnose because you just do a simple
blood test and you identify this it's
just not part of a routine health care
system yet yet it's in the research it's
in the researcher it's in the journals
it's in the publications but there's you
know application to those
takes a long time
yeah okay so
man now that we've got that bit of bad
news uh but you can't do things for
autoimmunity that's where we're heading
so
now i want to know i really want to put
a fine point on things that we can avoid
doing and then we're going to layer that
with things that we can add on top of
that so the avoid uh
doesn't seem wise to play with gluten if
you may have a tolerance you may not but
you might and given that that mimics the
cerebellum which does not strike me as a
good thing that you want your immune
system attacking right
i wouldn't play around with that but you
seem like you want to say no it's fine
tell me more it's not just gluten i mean
it's not just gluten but is it gluten it
can't it can be gluten gluten is the
most very common one because it's such a
new protein gluten protein is new it's
it's not the same protein we used like
when we were kids and we had wheat it
was not the same protein right it wasn't
genetically modified that was hybridized
it's hybridized right so gluten has been
hybridized and basically cross-bred it
and also a lot of the pesticides that
are being used bind to gluten and they
change the structure of the molecule
and when they change the structure the
molecule becomes more antigenic this is
called haptic antigenic uh more immune
reactive so there's a constant
there's a constant
haptonation when a chemical binds to a
protein it makes it change the structure
and then it becomes more antigenic
meaning more immune reactive yeah then
because the body's like this is weird
we've never seen this protein before
so so now you have chemicals and
different pesticides that are being used
that are now showing to change gluten
they change the molecular structure of
the protein so now it becomes like a new
protein that our museum has not seen
before and it triggers the immune
response hello my friend you know that i
believe success requires you to see
failure as the ultimate learning tool
success requires you to be disciplined
and gritty and to never ever quit on
your dreams i say all of that because
one thing is certain the road to
achieving your goal is not smooth or
linear i wish it was but it's not it's
going to be bumpy sometimes scary some
days you'll take two steps forward and
slide 10 steps back and that's why
success also requires you to know how to
pull yourself out of a rut and get
unstuck fast life is short you can't be
messing around with your goals you've
got to make progress every single day so
i've pulled a class from impact theory
university called how to get unstuck
which you can watch for free with the
link on your screen or by clicking below
when you join me for that free preview
of that workshop from impact theory
university i'm going to teach you my
strategy for how to
understand exactly where you need to be
going how to identify the obstacle
that's blocking you and the best way to
make the most progress towards that goal
and keep your momentum all right click
that link and let's get to work all
right i'll see you on the inside
so we cross-bred it changed it new
protein and then slathered on pesticides
which mutate i don't know if mutated is
the right word but they bend it yep
misshaped it yeah to where the body's
like oh this is really new exactly and
so now the immune system goes ham bad
news is that it's still similar enough
to the cerebellum yeah that we're
tearing that apart as well yeah and so
the most common proteins that do that
will be like gmos also like corn soy
egg protein because in the gm mowing of
it yes we create new proteins yes
and then also what's very reactive with
people uh is egg protein albumin
and milk and wheat so what other and by
the way this is you know what people
call the autoimmune paleo diet and you
know
long before they use the term automatic
diet when i work i work with autonomy
disease patients all the time
they would come and go and they would
bring in their own food and tupperware
because they couldn't eat out they
couldn't eat anything they always get
sick and they had to basically get off
you know all these inflammatory foods it
depends on the extent of the immune
response so it's not like just a cluster
of foods but when people have
autoimmunity and they just don't know
where to start like if you're like don't
know where to start you have access to
lab testing and someone to work with
autumn paleo diet which gets rid of
gluten dairy you know eggs nightshades
lectins these foods
is the is the place to go because
they're all antigenic exactly
exactly he learns fast they're very
antigenic okay
and when people have a dysregulated
immune system anything that's highly
antigenic tends to be a trigger
and then if some of these proteins that
they make antibodies to can crosstrack
with their own tissue that's where you
have molecular mimicry that's why
there's such different uniquenesses that
people have autoimmune diseases with
certain reactions everyone's different
you're never gonna have two rheumatoid
arthritis patients or lupus patients
that are exactly the same
because they have different proteins
they're reacting to but they have the
thing in common is they've lost their
immune tolerance
okay so
anything else that we don't eat in the
autoimmune paleo diet well it's
basically gluten dairy nightshades
grains also grains are very similar
sometimes that's the whole class the
whole class no more quinoa for you
exactly
rice's grains right yeah but again
there's the individual uniqueness some
people have autoimmune disease they
can't handle those some cannot yeah yeah
so that's you can be the nuanced one i'm
gonna be over here oversimplifying
things okay well automate paleo yeah
okay so well
in asking that question again we just
lost grains if i ask it a third time am
i going to well this is so this so this
is where you get a problem the problem
is there's this concept called immune
tolerance we talked about right yep and
when your diet isn't diversified like
with lots of different food proteins
different then you lose uh your gut
diversity because all of a sudden you
can be 27 and encounter rice for the
first time and now your body's freaking
out when in reality
well if it encountered it earlier well
like if you have the same breakfast
lunch and dinner every single day yep
you had me at hello i try to do that
okay even though i know that sounds like
it's the punch line is don't don't
you unite the fibers you eat are gonna
they're gonna cause different my
bacteria and microbiome to populate yep
the more diverse your plant fiber diet
the more diverse your diet is the more
microbiome bacterial species you produce
so it's a direct relationship between
the diversity of your diet
especially different plant fibers and
the diversity of your microbiome so what
happens with some other means of these
people is they go well i gotta i can't
eat grains i can't nitrate i can't eat
anything
i'm just going to have chicken breast
every morning and broccoli because i can
just tolerate that i don't care about
food anymore and then they
they they narrow their diets so much now
they've lost their microbiome diversity
and now their immune tolerance is much
worse than before because the more
diverse your gut bacteria microbiome is
the more immune regulation you have the
greater tolerance you have
and things like like exercise improves
microbiome diversity eating a diverse
diet improves microbiota i would
exercise
you get blood flow to your gut you
activate vagal pathways you turn on gene
expressions and they've got microbiome
it actually makes the microbiome wide
very fast so you have a whole section in
the book about vagal
nerve and what you have to do and i'd
never heard anybody talk about how i
could exercise my vagal nerve by gagging
myself ps and gargling yeah um but one
tell people what the the vagus nerve is
and then why does vagal conditioning
matter
okay well so so for that that specific
relationship between the vegas well
you're really worried about head injury
patients you'll have traumatic brain
injuries and how they lose their brain
gut access so there's a brain gut axis
and there's a gut to brain access the
brain gut access meaning downward as the
brain fires down to the brain stem in
the lower ears of the brain stem we have
a group of nuclei called the vagal
nuclei and the vagal nuclei help get
blood flow to the gut they activate
autonomics to get blood flow to the gut
they release enzymes they impact immune
function in the gut so if your brain's
healthy you get that nice brain-to-gut
response so sometimes people get
traumatic brain injuries or develop
neurological autoimmunity of the brain
their brain becomes less efficient
there's less activation to their vagal
centers and then clinically we see that
they they don't have a gag reflex they
they have abnormal gag reflex their
palate doesn't move they don't have
intestinal motility issues they're
constipation allergies and i said that
constipation is like an early sign of
several neurological diseases right so
that's that brain vagal pathway and this
vagus nerve from the brain stem goes all
the way to the gut
and then like in parkinson's disease the
parkinson's disease is really what's
called the alpha neutrinopathy where
these alpha snakes just going to say
that these alpha synuclein proteins
build up and they get in the way of
normal normal synaptic activity and it
starts in the gut so most people that
parkinson's disease will have
constipation 20 years before they have
tremor
and they'll have loss of smell because
also impact olfactory bulbs so they lose
smell and gut function and you said
there are three particular scents let's
see if i can remember oh wow you are
sharp peppermint yes
a niece yes
oh god the third one
coffee coffee oh come on that's pretty
good so those are researchers have found
those three or those are the three
earliest findings of loss of smell with
early parkinson's disease i was
literally going to order like those
three things so i can just make sure
every day that i'm doing okay well
that's just specific for parkinson's
parkinson's build up about anything i
can test at home i'll take yeah so
that's that's the so that's the
relationship between this gut is you
have this gut that has this pathway from
the brain to the gut and then the gut
bacteria produces polysaccharides and
different peptides and as inputs from
the vagus and also through cytokines and
growth factors in the bloodstream that
impact the brain and the brain gets
always working together but once you
start to for example lose brain have a
brain injury you lose that vagal input
then your gut starts to disrupt now you
have like a chronic gut issue that
becomes hard to diagnose or you can have
a chronic gut issue that causes
inflammation breaks down the blood-brain
barrier and then now the blood-brain
barrier is permeable and then you start
this cascaded brain inflammation the
brain starts to degenerate now you get
less vagal activity and get these brain
gut gut brain disorders and this is why
a lot of people have bad brains and bad
guts and they go to one part of
healthcare and they go oh everything's
about the gut they've got another part
and
the brain usually gets ignored but these
these infinite relationships are there
and these brain gut gut brain
relationships are really a
reason for lots of chronic
health problems today
for sure having been through this myself
and my wife had just unbelievable
problems
okay so really fast just to capstone the
vagal nerve so there are things that you
can do to condition it so you said gag
reflex take a tongue depressor press
down on your tongue don't jab the back
of your throat right so if anything like
there's got to be like the right
person candidate for right so you
literally don't want to do vagal
activities unless you have a vagal
disorder your biggest clue that your
vehicle disorder is number one
you can't swallow very well you've
noticed hey i can't take as many
supplements so as a clinician i'll hear
a patient say
you know don't give me a lot of
supplements i can't swallow them can you
give me powders that's a major red flag
the vegas isn't working because the
vagus nerve activates what are called
glossopharyngeal muscles in the back
throat that allow you to swallow so that
swelling response is all vagal which
then impacts your gut motility and gut
function everything so if someone has
eventually swallowing somebody has
constant gags or food
someone who has chronic constipation all
the time and they don't have that's used
like magnesiums or stool softeners to
have regular bowel movements there's
some kind of laxative on a daily basis
those are all signs that the vagus
nerve could be in trouble and sometimes
people get a brain injury and then five
or ten years later they start to get
these vagal impacts and then the brain
got access starts to become
dysfunctional now like their vagal
system isn't working
and if you don't get blood flow to your
gut and have motility happening
you start to get dysbiosis you start to
get leaky gut now you react to food
proteins let's say the most common food
protein is
gluten because it's a new protein
modern wheat and modern wheat then makes
antibodies then those antibodies
cross react to the tissue in the brain
and now you have a cascade of brain gut
access autoimmune disease
that's really common which is like and
it's also part of child developmental
disorders it's part of chronic
depression it's run of
chronic anxiety disorders gluten also
binds to an enzyme called
glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 gd65
which is the prot the enzyme
that makes uh gaba
so you get chronic anxiety disorders
with people and they have these
reactions and you can measure these you
can just measure gases find antibodies
and see if that's that's there or not
the part that i wanted to get to is in
the book you for people that are
struggling with the
uh vagal nerve that coffee enemas right
are like the
go-to
uh strategy i was like what yeah what's
funny is people always fixate
uncomfortable i just can't like imagine
like
is it just the caffeine or is it is it
some other property of coffee and by the
way i feel like it's warrants saying
cool the coffee down
body temperature yeah i was going to say
we don't want uh okay so when people
have brain gut access storage and the
vegas isn't working the goal is to how
do you activate the vagus right so if
neurons get injured neurons aren't
firing then the goal is to develop
neuroplasticity so neuroplasticity is
where you get a neuron to branch over it
so someone has traumatic brain injury
they can activate activity to the vagus
that they get starts to degenerate
then you go how do you how do you get
that vagal activity going you activate
it as you activate
pathways right specifically actually
vagal pathways you develop mitochondria
biogenesis you get synaptogenic activity
neurons start to grow neurons start to
branch so when someone has a vagus
problem you want to get that vagus
apparatus working
so coffee enemas the way they work is
when someone uh isn't people use coffee
animals for like detox reasons that's
not the purpose here the way you use
coffee enough for a brain got an excess
disorder is you use coffee and then you
would hold the bowel hold the coffee as
long as you can and caffeine activates
what are called acetylcholine nicotinic
receptors and acidic nicotinic receptors
fire smooth muscle pathways that
directly fire into the vegas so now if
someone is doing coffee enema they're
holding their their bowel with coffee as
long as they can
they're actually
activating that acetylcholine pathway
and developing bagel responses
overall as long as they can and they
have to you know eliminate
and do a normal response but that
holding of the coffee and their bowel is
something that activates the vegas same
as gargling gargling it will activate
the glossopharyngeal muscles the back
throat that supports mitochondrial
biogenesis of the vagus so is like doing
a gag reflex on your tongue
it's just neurological pathways to it
all right so we've got a good list of
things not to do
now let's start layering on we'll start
with something i've heard you say which
to me just seems like the default answer
in everyone's life which is eat whole
food only
um that's interesting i've heard you say
that before but uh you disagree with
that
well i mean again it's it's not so much
the food it's the protein right so so
whole food but if you're immune reactive
to it then you got a problem right so
let's say you have lectin sensitivity
and you eat whole foods lectins still
going to be a problem it could be a
problem for you and then you can have
significant immune reactions
though lectin binds specifically
something called wheat germ
wheat german gluten and wheat germ
gluten binds to
nerve growth factors on nerves so if you
have that specific reaction it's a
problem
so that's that's the thing i mean for
the most people it's great but then when
you're talking about the subset of
people that chronic disease and now
autoimmunity and immune system is
different like simple things just like
whole food
yes would be great but as long as they
don't have individual immune reactivity
would you still try to bucket them into
whole food but whole food that they
respond well to or for some people is
processed food still
of course processed foods terrible got
lots of inflammatory prostaglandins in
there partial hydrogenated fats lots of
sugar lots of salt those
lots of
processed proteins i mean you definitely
want yeah real food
when someone's sick when they actually
try to figure out how they get through
the day they'll end up on real food and
they'll end up on limited amounts of
what they can tolerate you know for me
when i was younger after my twenties i'd
see people's autoimmune disease come in
like i was saying with the tupperware
food just a few things they could eat
and they could eat anything else like
what's happening and then now we
understand that there's all these immune
reactions and protein reactions that are
happening
and
it's it's that's why there's that
uniqueness that's why general principles
are sometimes hard when you become
chronic and this is why chronic disease
patients are frustrated because they go
from reading one person right lectins
are dangerous they could avoid all
lectins now they've totally lost their
microbiome diversity because now they're
nighting lectins and maybe they didn't
have any reactions to it
and then someone else is
you know totally avoiding
milk but they don't have reaction to it
and milk can help their siga levels in
their gut and stop their immune system
so
it's very frustrating protocol that you
walk people through or it's all blood
tests
i don't i think protocols are
inefficient i think interesting okay so
protocols are inefficient what is
efficient a head-to-toe workout a
head-to-toe workout panel
blood panel imaging physical exam
the whole routine that's why it's it's
hard you know like this is uh
it's it's challenging when people get
chronically sick you went through the
experience with your wife lisa she went
through a whole series that wasn't one
test right it was this journey through
it and this is what's so frustrating is
that
so many people especially people that do
all the right thing and eat well and
exercise and do everything else
something gets sick like what happened
something impacted the body something in
many cases it's an immune related issue
and uh
the good news is she was doing
everything wrong oh that's right so yeah
i mean so she had taken so many
antibiotics it was crazy okay um her
diet was ultra limited so she was in
amazing shape yep amazing yeah but her
diet was just that exact kind of narrow
diet you were saying to avoid so you put
antibiotics together with a hyper
limited diet and oh by the way she loves
to work out loves it
but
definitely i would say has a tendency to
overdo it
so
in fact that's something that we should
talk about as another don't which is
stress
in fact in the book you say this is a
paraphrase was pretty close the worst
thing that you can do for your brain is
stress
and i was like oh man it's my only vice
my only vice is stressed well there's
good stress and bad stress right i
probably still into the bad yeah i'm
sure i'm completely nervous you're a
highly accomplished person i'm sure
you're
dentally in that way but it's
but if you if people like you that are
highly successful they learn how to
adapt with stress
so i'm sure you have a very good
schedule that allows you to adapt to
stress and be highly efficient
yes right yes but i would say that
especially
now i'm in a period in my life where i
recognize i'm shortening my life right
i'm now doing i'm like so 93 hours for
me is like
it's perfect i can do that forever i
don't feel stressed it's amazing i don't
have kids so that's a huge part but now
i'm doing 120 hours a week and that i
can tell is problematic yeah
so everyone has their own level of
stress tolerance usually and by the way
i mean stress is good if you don't have
stress you actually you get massive
depression so you have to have some
figure of stress your brain has to have
activity your frontal lobe has to fire
you have to have activity it has to be
some limbic response is that necessarily
stress though it's it well it depends
how you define stress but in general
like if we put you in an island and just
gave you
whatever you wanted and you you would
you would find stress into how your
drink isn't the right level or you don't
have the right umbrella when do you
leave or why is the sun in my face
you're gonna fixate on something stress
and that's a normal physiological
survival response we'd have to have
stress like stress gets nailed as a bad
guy it's just a matter of does it
overwhelm your capacity to respond to it
but the problem with stress is it
releases cortisol especially when it's
non-adapted stress so there's adapted
stress and not adapted stress but
non-adaptive stress will break down the
blood-brain barrier we'll break down the
gut barrier will cause
difference
one of the key findings should be your
cortisol levels are high if your
cortisol levels are outside efficiency
so an adaptive stress my cortisol levels
won't be that high yeah let's say we
take someone into your schedule
right and they can't handle it they
can't get to 93 hours they get to 40
hours and their cortisols are off the
chart right and then
you're fine with it so you can handle
that degree of stress and you've built
your own adaptation process and your own
physiology to deal with that stress
right just like someone who can run
long distance
you take someone's number long-run
distance they they can't do it they'll
get into a metabolic over training
syndrome every time so our body has
adaptation stress abilities so stress is
not necessarily the bad guy because you
have to have it to turn on actually
antioxidant systems and to turn on brain
activity and physiological systems it's
just one that exceeds your
abilities to dan to modulate it right so
you don't have that adaptive skills for
it
so but it's easy to you know overdo it
and then but you have to kind of over do
it here every now and then to then build
your skills right so just like someone
who runs
like
25 miles a day or something
they had to
get into a stress response
and then recover and then get through it
so some people are extremely
highly efficient with what
is would be devastating for someone else
and their their stress hormones are not
high so it's all specific to that
pattern but but stress when it's
uncontrolled and it's past a person's
abilities can be devastating for the
brain and why the cortisol causes
atrophy of the brain so it actually
shrinks the brain
the cortisol breaks down the barriers
and
the
area of the brain called the medial
temporal of the hippocampus
is where you control your cortisol
rhythm that's also the area of your
brain which controls your declarative
long-term memories for alzheimer's
disease hits first
and when you have
too much cortisol for extended periods
of brain actually what they find in
imaging studies is that the hippocampus
starts to atrophy and degenerate so then
long-term memory becomes impaired and
that starts sets up the stage for
neurodegenerative changes for
alzheimer's disease uh in that specific
location so
again it's a it's about like bounce so
you have 93 hour work week let's say you
measure course levels you might be just
perfect you're like great
you're killing it
and someone else can't do that so so
stress is you know one of those things
like dietary proteins they're not all
they're not all bad it all depends what
your immune response is and stress is
going to depend upon your adaptive
abilities to what those levels are
what about exercise
so exercise um the same thing and for
the brain it's phenomenal right exercise
is going to release brain derived
neurotropic factor it's going to support
mitochondrial biogenesis so you have
more endurance cells built in it's going
to release opioids it's going to have
adipocytes release things like
adiponectin all these things have
anti-inflammatory effects throughout the
body
they help
set up stage for neuroplasticity they
slow down the mechanisms for
neurodegeneration they get blood flow to
the brain they activate neurotransmitter
activities uh you proof free radicals
during exercise but afterwards you have
hours and hours of making antioxidants
but with exercise you could over train
so if at least that you're saying was
over training then you get into this
phenomena called metabolic overtraining
syndrome where now you have these
inflammatory cytokine responses and you
get breakdown of tissue and everything
goes the wrong way and the biggest clue
someone's getting to metabolic
overtraining syndrome is that they don't
recover from the workouts and they start
to get depression the performance goes
down over time
so you know like everything you want to
look and listen to these things because
everyone needs a little bit of stress
everyone needs
physical activity the higher they can go
with that over training the better
the highest level stress you can get
without over doing it the better
so it's this is this constant
being being aware of what those things
are
and and what i've noticed is highly
efficient people is that's what they
figure out
it's interesting that you've zoned in on
efficiency
that to me feels like the secret that
people don't really understand is that
to
be successful one you have to be really
good at problem solving but two you have
to have
an obsession with efficiency yep
and then it goes back to brain function
listen everything that
requires success requires healthy brain
function as a matter of fact some people
have desired motivation to take the next
level can't because their brains aren't
healthy enough
they don't have brain endurance so
that's the other key thing
when the brain starts to become
unhealthy the first thing you start to
see is low endurance
you don't just see
like ms mental endurance well it depends
on what part of your brain you're using
right so we talked about the cerebellum
a lot if the cerebellum is starting to
degenerate it's not going to maybe
impact cognition as much but now their
muscle tone is off because the cerebrum
controls muscle tone so now they don't
have good posture and now they can't
stand without getting neck and back pain
all the time now they get vertigo and
dizziness now they get car sickness and
seasickness all the time those are
specific for that area of the brain if
the parietal lobe starts to degenerate
then they start to bump into things and
and start to sprain the same ankle over
and over again because the brain can't
perceive where their part of the limb is
to the brain because that's what that
function of the brain is the frontal
lobe starts to generate that's when you
would start to lose executive function
focus attention concentration planning
following through with tasks
so
what people will start to have unhealthy
brains like let's say they get brain
inflammation your inflammation maybe
they get a braincode access order got
brain active disorder maybe they get
gluten sensitivity
who knows maybe this inflammatory
response this inflamed response to the
brain is going to then shut down nerve
conductance and if it impacts the
frontal lobe then their executive
function is going to go down so now they
want to
build their business they want to
improve their life they want to do
whatever they want to do and now they
can only do for two hours a day and then
they're done then some days it's more
than other days that it has a lot to do
with their
inflammatory state their mitochondrial
function and those factors as well which
you know is important i know you're a
lot about efficiency and and having
people reach the next level
but the brain is a part of that
how do we like push our limits with this
stuff
so
one okay i get my diet right i know
sleep is a big part of what you
prescribe to people but if somebody is
noticing like
i'm declining here whether it's um like
i never used to get carsick
and now in
rare admittedly but in certain
circumstances i will my wife's car
sickness is definitely getting worse
she's always gotten carsick her whole
family has but like
if we start noticing signs that in the
book you say stop chalking things up to
aging like a lot of the stuff that
people are just like oh well
uh or you really can do something yeah
like if you're getting car sick and
seasick then what's happening is the
rate of this visual and vestibular input
is exceeding your rate of dampening it
and your cerebellar becomes inhibition
system pathways it's like the neurology
is there not to get into neurology but
the neurology's there like that's a
mechanism it's not a personality trait
it's not because other people in the
family had it it's like other people in
the family having the same area of their
brain degenerate
it's a degenerative process we tend to
like call it oh i've always been bad
with numbers or i've always had car
sickness no you've been bad with numbers
because your inferior parallel isn't
developed or it's degenerating so how do
we build that stuff because i'm terrible
with numbers
whatever you can't do you do that's a
simple concept of neurological rehab so
you have to have neuroplasticity exceed
neurodegeneration to get function right
so if your neurodegeneration is more
than your neuroplasticity then you then
you can't
gain function and then it starts to over
time degenerate right
so let's say
you are bad with numbers or someone's
bad with numbers and maybe they were bad
with numbers as a kid literally i feel
like my entire life it's made no sense
okay so what happens your entire life
the area of your brain let's just call
it the math area which is the inferior
parietal
lobe if your protolo hasn't developed as
much as the other areas
because you haven't used it right you've
kind of avoided math let's say your
whole life or let's say someone
has a different scenario they were
uncoordinated no one picked them in
sports they never played sports because
they were always clumsy so they never
developed their motor skills so those
motor pathways
over their lifespan has less
connectivity to each other right
and maybe in your in your case where
someone isn't good at math maybe the
infra inferior part of a lot of people
with math is doesn't have enough
connectivity right
so now you get things that start to
generate the brain right over time and
just aging itself is going to turn on
some of these processes more than before
more free radicals less antioxidant
production all those things
the areas where you don't have as much
connectivity plastic developed is where
you're going to have symptoms first
right so if your brain starts to go the
wrong way you're not going to have areas
develop show up signs where you had lots
of connectivity and plasticity you can
have areas where you had least amount of
connectivity and plasticity so people
will say well i was always bad at math
but then i got over it and now it's
really coming back it's like yeah you
never really developed it didn't you you
compensate now as your brain degenerate
those are coming back more so same with
car sickness i had scar sickness when i
was a kid i don't have it i didn't have
it to my whole adulthood now as i'm
getting older it's coming back yeah
because you're degenerating and the
areas where you have the least amount of
you said do the things that you can't do
so exposing myself to things that make
me carsick will actually help me avoid
that degeneration technically yes but if
you you can't exceed the rate of what
your neurons can handle right
so visual tracking
could be helpful this gives the world of
like neurological rehabilitation and
things like that but for example if this
math is an issue that's easy you can get
an app you can get like a child's
easy mat math app and start doing those
um
some people play video games
and they do lots of motion and movement
that helps them rebuild but if they play
too long then they get dizzy
and they get symptoms that develop so
every neuron every neurological pathway
has endurance based on how much
mitochondria are there so when you don't
use certain neurons then you have less
mitochondria there just like if you use
muscles you have less muscle
mitochondria so then they have less
endurance then as people get unhealthy
as people start to degeneration
there's they have less
neuron activity less mitochondria to
show up and that's where their endurance
in those areas are going to show up
first
so
if you activate those pathways without
passing how much mitochondria activity
you have then you don't get symptoms and
you can start to develop just like if
you
are out of shape and you try to run you
can only run so far and then you have to
back off and then run to your capacity
and then over time you can build run
more and more that's actually my muscle
mitochondria developing that's allowing
you to do that neurons work the same way
so whatever you can't do is you do what
you want to do so if driving for three
hours makes you have car sickness or
driving in a really windy road makes you
have car sickness then you want to drive
in less theoretically and less wind you
do it over and over again and then kind
of build up or if we're going to really
wind your road but for not as long and
then do that repetitively do that
repetitively you're then building
mitochondria in those pathways and
you're building nerve growth factor
release and you cause nerve factors
neurobranching and then you start to get
plasticity there and then you have
recovery
it's very useful now if
somebody wanted to supplement their way
to success sure are there things that we
can do to protect our brains or of
course yeah you know these i'm sure
you're pro at these uh i actually avoid
supplements you do yeah so i'm super
leery of anything that i'm taking from
the outside but i'm open
that's more a general rule than a hard
and fast rule
um obviously i've read the book so i
know some of these punch lines but i'd
be very curious to hear
what your take is on supplementation
well it all depends what your goals are
and living forever at
einsteinian levels of well specifically
so there's no magic supplement the brain
needs more than anything is it needs
activation
specific to the area that you want
function in it needs to have reduced
inflammation for whatever can reduce
inflammation
and it needs physical exercise to heart
rate up to to release things like nitric
oxide nerve growth factor brain
diagnostic factor that's what the brain
needs to have the brain needs
stimulation the brain needs glucose the
brain needs oxygen that's what it has to
have to thrive right so if you get
someone who has lots of inflammation
that's going to be a problem so maybe
anti-inflammatory supplements could be a
strategy you have someone who
is chronic chronically hypoglycemic
their blood sugar they play
rollercoaster at the blood sugar all day
the brain is not going to function well
there maybe for them
stabilizing the blood sugar or taking
nutraceuticals that help their blood
sugar stability may be important for
them right you have another person who
is fat phobic doesn't need any fats
because they think fats are bad and
they're worried about calories so now
they don't have healthy amounts of
essential fatty acids i did that for
years
right so it really made such a
difference man to add fat in my diet
it's crazy right so there isn't a magic
supplement but
it depends like is it in a clinical
world like what is the clinical strategy
what am i trying to accomplish
like if you have someone who's got
alzheimer's disease
and they have b12 anemia contributing to
it then for sure supplementing b12 is
going to have a huge impact on them
right or if someone has high
homocysteine
and that's a
that's a
inflammatory metabolite that really
requires b vitamins and some people have
what are called single nucleotide
polymorphisms or genetically they can't
process b12 as much as other people can
they may not get enough from their diet
and their homocysteine is high and they
have alzheimer's in their whole family
and they don't know why and then someone
measures their homocysteine and go hey
you have to take a type of folate that
that goes over your genetic uniqueness
so you don't have this high elevation of
this inflammatory degenerating marker so
maybe for them supplementation can be
very useful
so there's all these different variables
and
i'm not trying to not answer you i'm
just trying to no no i get it man it's
as complex as it is
dude this is so interesting the book is
absolutely fantastic where can people
follow along with you you put out a lot
of dope content thank you dr k news
drknews.com that's where all my stuff's
at you didn't make them spell out your
whole last name i can't imagine why yeah
right
that's awesome and where can they get
the book
amazon
yeah nice and easy
all right guys as somebody who's read
the book i'm telling you check it out
your brain is the thing that you
literally are a brain in a vat it just
so happens that your skull is the vat so
taking care of your brain is critical
and the book lays out a lot more detail
than what we were able to get to today
it's amazing he's also got a lot of
killer youtube content so be sure to
check it out and speaking of things you
should check out if you haven't already
be sure to subscribe and until next time
my friends be legendary take care peace
if i'm able to make my skin temperature
not going down while being exposed to
ice cold water skin temperature that's
power
and that power is the same power we can
learn to embrace and awaken
you